there's good news and there's bad news
the good news is I'm back with another
video offering you some analysis and
critique of Bernie Sanders book our
revolution the bad news is I gave Bernie
Sanders a little bit too much credit in
my last video now today I'm going to be
talking about the incredibly important
issue of income and wealth inequality
for the last 40 years the American
middle class has been disappearing and
more Americans are living in poverty
than in almost any point in our nation's
history since 2005 the typical
middle-class family has seen its wealth
go down by more than 36 percent I
commented that in general Bernie Sanders
claims that the wages of the working
poor the wages of the middle class in
America that they have stagnated in
recent decades I said that Bernie
Sanders seems to avoid saying that the
rich are getting richer and the poor
getting poorer most likely because he is
aware that this is statistically untrue
[Music]
in the united states of america i showed
a whole bunch of charts to demonstrate
this fact inequality is increasing but
inequality has been increasing because
the rich are getting richer much much
more rapidly exponentially more rapidly
then the poor are getting richer however
still doesn't mean the poor getting
poorer that is a heat that is a lie
but here i find on page 191 of this book
quote in the real world the rich are
getting richer and most everyone else is
getting poorer so there's a claim that
both the poor and the middle class are
getting poorer okay I've already shown
you guys charts to the effect that this
is false
many people just didn't want to believe
what the shrewd I've got a lot of really
idiotic fan mail or hate mail and
response to that I love that what some
people wrote in saying oh um but those
charts don't account for inflation you
look at a chart from like 1979 to 2010
or 2015 isn't like who you think those
charts don't account for inflation and
what one of the charts even says right
on the headline right at the top it says
real wages real wages and cumulative
growth of real wages and percentage of
gross national income
if you don't know if you don't know the
significance of real wages in relation
to inflation or measures like percentage
of GDP percentage of gross national
income inflation to inflation I can't
help you people if you're looking at the
facts if you look into the facts and
you're refusing to see what's there in
front of your face because you want to
keep believing the myth that the poor
are getting poorer even when the facts
show you the opposite this is the
situation we're in in the mainstream of
today and here is Bernie Sanders saying
loud and clear - lies - lies the first
law is the rich are getting richer and
everyone else is getting poor this is
the this is the first lie and then the
second lie I don't think I need to read
it out you can probably tell you from
within that
that quotation he claims that Congress
that the federal government of the
United States is doing nothing to deal
with this this reads we could do an
impersonation of Courtney Sandra it
sounds like it was transcribed from his
speech the writing style it's very much
like a speech and what other members of
Congress doing about these issues I will
tell you what they are doing they are
out spending a ridiculous amount of time
raising money for the next campaigns and
then once elected they are representing
the interests of the people who funded
those campaigns so he is claiming that
the rich are getting richer the poor
getting poorer and the federal
government is doing nothing to help the
poor okay so both of these lies we can
fact check through a quick Google search
let's do it people here's a quote from
Michael Aris train I am guessing at the
time this photograph was taken
Michael strain was not vegan just to
guess just to guess Michael by all means
send me an email and let me know if I'm
wrong I'm guessing you are not on a
vegan diet that would be my guess um
let's go with the average hourly
earnings of production and non
supervisory employees produced by the
Bureau of Labor Statistics about four
and five people in the labor force are
included in this group they can be
thought of roughly as workers not
managers they're often described as
typical orders and many of the
statistics use this it is a kludge that
basically excludes people like
executives and yes managers it tries to
exclude people whose pay is not going to
be in such a simple straightforward way
based on the hours of labor as you know
executives may have all kinds of special
privileges and bonuses and stuff so it's
trying to look at so called normal
workers Oh
using the PCE to adjust for inflation ah
these statistics are adjusted for
inflation guys it's just sorry if you
can't interpret really simple economic
and social science statistics use the
PCE to adjust for inflation the wages of
a typical
have increased by 32 percent over the
past three decades that's a significant
increase in purchasing power if all
people hear is that wages have been
stagnant for decades as part of a game
rig to benefit the people at the top
they might well believe it okay let's go
on to a new chart there's new in the
sense that it hasn't appeared in my my
prior video here we are zoomed out you
can see that the source is from the CBO
of the American Congressional Budget
Office but let's zoom in what are we
looking at people we're going in on the
left you see the growth in income before
the effect of the federal government's
intervention okay so there is there
several different myths and
misconceptions Peak exploded in this
video one is just the idea that the poor
are getting poorer okay if we look at
the left-hand side of this chart look at
the green lines that does not show the
poor getting poorer let's just say you
look from 1995 to 2015 the two green
lines right this does not show the poor
getting poorer that's just a lie okay
but here's the other thing that's really
interesting if we compare to the purple
chart on the right hand side
wow what a dramatic difference the
federal government makes and I looked
into it this is exactly what Bernie
Sanders was complaining but he was
complaining about Congress
he wasn't complaining but the local
mayor or the local state governor he was
complaining about the federal government
okay this is not calculating the effects
of state level or city level
interventions this is just measuring the
effect of federal government
interventions and this report from the
CBO was criticized for that reason that
it's much more complex to take you to
account all 50 states and the conditions
there you'd have to have a lot more
lines in the chart but just the effect
of the redistribution of income that the
federal government fragance to the
people that it's America is dramatic so
the the lightest line the lowest
quintile
line instead of going up by only 32 has
gone up by 79 look at that lilac purple
line how much there's a look at the
dramatic effect of government
intervention and redistribution from the
rich to the poor by that gold you SMA so
these are these are powerful myths that
the mainstream Left has this isn't like
communism or socialism the mainstream
American Left is clinging to the myth
the same myths that people like Bernie
Sanders and the other people attending
the Democrat primary is that they even
present they're clinging to the myth of
the poor getting poorer they're clinging
to the myth that the federal government
is doing nothing to help rubble we just
looked at a very real quantitative
measure of how dramatic the impact that
is since 2000 in poverty the typical
middle-class family has seen its well go
down by more than 36 percent
[Music]
for the last 40 years the American and a
third myth I challenge you in mountains
to let me know if you'd ever hurt Bernie
Sanders invoke this one a third myth
that's very important for the current
generation is the myth that capitalism
will inevitably fail and will inevitably
implode will inevitably collapse of
turrets of the park
why why why wow-wow because allegedly
allegedly capitalism requires who don't
quote infinite resources since profit
can only be achieved through growth a
capitalist must always push production
farther and farther however production
requires the use of goods that are not
infinite like labour and natural
resources since capitalism cannot
administer a limit it will always
eventually crash in other words
capitalism always ends up destroying the
hand that feeds it that is the most
laughably unempioyed unfalsifiable
dogmatic and ridiculous claim imaginable
and it falls apart just to a simple
process of Socratic dialogue like okay
so what is it the capitalism requires
what factor does capital is required to
be infinite given that throughout its
entire history none of the factors of
production of an infinite right
capitalism doesn't need infinite labor
doesn't need infinite water doesn't need
infinite coal on the contrary the price
mechanism in capitalism is very much
tethered to the idea that all of the
factors are finite at least the amount
that's available is finite right
essentially really from a strictly
theoretical perspective capitalism
thrives on finitude and thrives on
scarcity responds to scarcity with the
pricing mechanism but moreover why would
this claim be made just about capitalism
if this were true if there were any
validity to this claim that human
society requires infinity to sustain
itself
why would that be true of capitalism but
not true of feudalism like are you
saying this is true the United States of
America but it's not true of Saudi
Arabia how does that fix things
um it's not true of like feudal you're
up you're fifteen hundred or something
how does that make sense why would this
claim if it's ultimately about you know
the things of this earth what water and
gasoline why would it be that capitalism
requires these things to be infinite but
not a communist system a communist
command economy of the Soviet Union okay
meaning a corporation will run out of
resources to use or that pollution will
start to be so great that it will start
to affect the costs of production this
is the natural outcome from a system
that seeks to produce the most amount of
goods for the least amount of money
possible capitalism is a system that
needs to perpetually grow and perpetual
growth on a finite planet with finite
resources is impossible so that is one
more lie that as far as I know Bernie
Sanders I mean look if you go through
the guy's whole career if you go back to
1985 maybe you can find him saying that
somewhere but in his current act in his
current routine I think this video was
addressed to lies that Bernie Sanders
does tell and one that he does not